---
title: Exercises
...

All exercises will be posted here as they are released (at least 1 week before the deadline).

# Instructions

Exercises are due some Tuesdays and Fridays. I recommend you start them early. In my experience with solving tricky problems, it is more productive to work on them in short bursts, with breaks in between. To solve a hard problem, it's less about the number of hours you spend working on it than it is about the number of showers.

# Policies

You may collaborate with up to 4 other people (i.e. a group of up to 5 total) when completing exercises. You may additionally use external materials with following restrictions:

- Your write-ups must be done entirely independently. You may discuss with collaborators, but we expect that the answers you submit be expressed in your own words. 
- You must understand everything you submit. Do not submit anything you could not explain to a member of the course staff.
- You **must** cite any and every source you consult beyond officially-provided materials. Included in your citation, you must identify which components of your submission came from each source (it will be understood that content with no citation is your own exclusive work). Your collaborators are considered to be sources, and so should be cited. An example citation might look like: "I collaborated with David Evans on the pdf style, I consulted \url{https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Aligning\%20equations\%20with\%20amsmath} for help with the align environment, Robbie Hott helped me to debug the for loop on line 107 of my code."
- Do not seek "hints" or entire solutions to the problems. Limit your searching to background information only. Do not use Chegg.

# Deliverables

Unless otherwise indicated, each problem set will be submitted as either a pdf or a java/python file on the [Assignments page](https://www.kytos.cs.virginia.edu/cs4102). Unless otherwise indicated, pdfs must be generated by LaTeX, and must be done by modifying the template file given.

# Problem Sets

# Unit 0: Getting started

Go here for [Instructions on Exercise 0](/getting_started.html).

## Unit 1: Divide and Conquer

For convenience, the Divide and Conquer exercises have been moved:

Go here for [Divide and Conquer Exercises](/dandc_exercises.html).

## Unit 2: Hashing and Sorting

Go here for [Hashing and Sorting Exercises](/hashsort_exercises.html).

## Unit 3: Dynamic Programming

Go here for [Dynamic Programming Exercises](/dp_exercises.html).

## Unit 4: Greedy

Go here for [Greedy Exercises](/greedy_exercises.html).

## Unit 5: Graphs

Go here for [Graph Exercises](/graph_exercises.html).

## Unit 6: Reductions

Go here for [Reductions Exercises](/reductions_exercises.html).
