---
title: Unit 2 Exercises, Hashing and Sorting
...

All Divide and Conquer exercises will be posted here as they are released (at least 1 week before the deadline).

# Instructions

Exercises are due some Tuesdays and Fridays. I recommend you start them early. In my experience with solving tricky problems, it is more productive to work on them in short bursts, with breaks in between. To solve a hard problem, it's less about the number of hours you spend working on it than it is about the number of showers.

# Policies

You may collaborate with up to 4 other people (i.e. a group of up to 5 total) when completing exercises. You may additionally use external materials with following restrictions:

- Your write-ups must be done entirely independently. You may discuss with collaborators, but we expect that the answers you submit be expressed in your own words. 
- You must understand everything you submit. Do not submit anything you could not explain to a member of the course staff.
- You **must** cite any and every source you consult beyond officially-provided materials. Included in your citation, you must identify which components of your submission came from each source (it will be understood that content with no citation is your own exclusive work). Your collaborators are considered to be sources, and so should be cited. An example citation might look like: "I collaborated with David Evans on the pdf style, I consulted \url{https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Aligning\%20equations\%20with\%20amsmath} for help with the align environment, Robbie Hott helped me to debug the for loop on line 107 of my code."
- Do not seek "hints" or entire solutions to the problems. Limit your searching to background information only. Do not use Chegg.

# Deliverables

Unless otherwise indicated, each problem set will be submitted as either a pdf or a java/python file on the [Assignments page](https://www.kytos.cs.virginia.edu/cs4102). Unless otherwise indicated, pdfs must be generated by LaTeX, and must be done by modifying the template file given.

# Problem Sets


There will be a total of 2 exercises for this unit (both written). The average across these exercsises will count as 50% of your grade on unit 2. The remaining 50% will be your grade on this unit's quiz.

## Exercise 1: Hashing and Randomness

This first exercise will guide you through the analysis of a randomized algorithm challenge you to develop your own efficient randomized algorithm, and to guide you through one way that Google uses hashing.

Our goal is for you to develop your familiarity with randomized algorithms and how they are designed and evaluated.


For your convenience, here is a pdf of the problem set: [hashing1_blank.pdf](files/exercises/hashing1_blank.pdf).

To complete this assignment:

- First download this zip file - [hashing1.zip](files/exercises/hashing1.zip) - and upload as a new project in Overleaf.

- Next, add you name and computing id under `submitter` in *exercise.tex*.

- Once you've solved a problem, edit the corresponding *problemX.tex* file to include your answers to the problems. In general, everything you need to change within the problem set is marked with a `TODO` comment, so look for those.

- After including all solutions, comment out the line that reads `usepackage{algo}` and uncomment the line that reads `usepackage[response]{algo}`. This will remove the problem set instructions, leaving your solutions in the document.

- Remember to add your resources and collaborators to `collaborators` in *exercise.tex*

- Finally, download the pdf generated by your LaTeX code, call it *hashing1.pdf*, and submit it on the [assignments page](https://www.kytos.cs.virginia.edu/cs4102).

## Exercise 2: Sorting

The second (and final) exercise for this unit will use ideas derived from the sorting algorithms and related arguments from class. The purpose of this exercise is for you to see how sorting algorithms can be applied in non-trivial ways, and to demonstrate that ideas behind sorting algorithms can inspire non-sorting algorithms as well.

For your convenience, here is a pdf of the problem set: [sorting_blank.pdf](files/exercises/sorting_blank.pdf).

To complete this assignment:

- First download this zip file - [sorting.zip](files/exercises/sorting.zip) - and upload as a new project in Overleaf.

- Next, add you name and computing id under `submitter` in *exercise.tex*.

- Once you've solved a problem, edit the corresponding *problemX.tex* file to include your answers to the problems. In general, everything you need to change within the problem set is marked with a `TODO` comment, so look for those.

- After including all solutions, comment out the line that reads `usepackage{algo}` and uncomment the line that reads `usepackage[response]{algo}`. This will remove the problem set instructions, leaving your solutions in the document.

- Remember to add your resources and collaborators to `collaborators` in *exercise.tex*

- Finally, download the pdf generated by your LaTeX code, call it *sorting.pdf*, and submit it on the [assignments page](https://www.kytos.cs.virginia.edu/cs4102).
